
---
layout: post
title: Formatting your bibliography in Latex
categories:
- tex
---

*... in which we discuss how to format your bibliography in tex.*

One thing which surprised me as an assistant professor was the constant demand for including your CV in everything. You get asked constantly for an (updated) CV. And because you have a new lab, you may want to be a bit more detail oriented with respect to joint first and, joint senior and joint corresponding authors. We will also cover how to split your bibliographies into different parts. I am imputing reasons, but I am sure this is behand the cry for help from Davis:

[](davis_cv_tweet.png)

The end result of this post will look like this

[](cv.pdf)

Handling bibliographies in Latex is done using Bibtex and `.bib` files. Or rather, this is how it historically was handled. These days, the new kid on the block is `biblatex`. Both Bibtex and biblatex uses a `.bib` to describe an entry in a bibliography. The difference is how the information in this file is transformed into the final document. 

**Bibtex**: for bibtex, you use a few commands inside your `.tex` file _together_ with something called a `.bst` file which details how bibliography details are being typeset. Whenever you need to switch format, you essentially need to find a new `.bst` file. These files are _very_ hard to construct yourself, partly because they have tons of details on arcane settings. This setup has been nice for journals (they can just supply their custom `.bst` file and no-one needs to think about anything, but has been hard for people like assistant professors who wants to play with things.

When you use Bibtex, your `cv.tex` file has snippets like this

```{tex}
\begin{document}
\bibliography{papers}
\bibliographystyle{IEEEtran}
\end{document}
```
This tells us to use `papers.bib` with the IEEEtran `.bst` file. Many people use the `natbib` package for typesetting citations.

**biblatex**: for biblatex, there are no longer a need for `.bst` files. Instead, you can fully custom most (all) of the typesetting. You need to load a package and set (sometimes very long) settings

```{tex}
\usepackage[backend=biber,style=authoryear,sorting=nyt,
	natbib=true,maxbibnames=99,firstinits=true,uniquename=false]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{papers.bib}

\begin{document}
\printbibliography[title=Bibliography]
\end{document}
```
the `\addbibresource` tells us to look for a specific `.bib` file. See how the `\printbibliography` can be customized by the `title` option.

Historically, I have been using Bibtex. One easy solution to many problems is to include code directly into the bib file, like
```
  author = {\textbf{Hansen}, \textbf{Kasper D.}}
```
This works, but everytime you want to do something different you need to modify the `.bib` file.

# The solution, using biblatex

We will two components of biblatex and bib files: keywords and XX. These are things you have in your `.bib` file. An example is easy

```
@article{compartments,
  author =	 {Fortin, Jean-Philippe and Hansen, Kasper D},
  title =	 {{Reconstructing A/B compartments as revealed by Hi-C using long-range correlations
               in epigenetic data}},
  year =	 {2015},
  journal =	 {Genome Biology},
  volume =	 {16},
  pages =	 {180},
  doi =		 {10.1186/s13059-015-0741-y},
  keywords =	 {peerjournal},
  author+an =	 {1=highlight; 2=highlight}
}
```
Focus on the `keywords` and the `author+an` fields. 

## How to print parts of a bib file

The `keywords` field enable you to only print part of the bibliography, specifically the ones with a specified keyword. Example:

```
\nocite{*}

\defbibnote{mynote}{$^*$ indicates equal contributions\\ $^\dagger$ indicates corresponding author(s)
   (if not the senior author)\\ \textbf{boldface} indicates a member of my lab \\}

\printbibliography[title=Journal Articles (peer reviewed),keyword=peerjournal,prenote=mynote]

\printbibliography[title={Journal Articles, Consortia member (peer reviewed)},keyword=peerconsortia]
```

The `mynote` typesets a note (before the bibliography). Then I print two sections, one for standard journal articles and one for consortia articles.

## How to highlight authors

I use 3 kinds of highlight: boldface for myself or my students. And then asterix and dagger for joint first or corresponding author. A more complicated `author+an` is
```
  author+an =	 {1=first; 2=first; 3=first,corresponding; 4=highlight; 12=highlight;
                  13=corresponding}
```
Note how each author is a number (that's a pain, I am not sure that can be circumvented), each author is separated by `;` and each type of highlight is separated by `,`. This code gives each author a tag. To get the required highlight you need to tell biblatex what to do with the tag. 

Without further ado I give you the following preamble
```
\renewcommand*{\mkbibnamegiven}[1]{%
\ifitemannotation{highlight}
{\textbf{#1}}
{#1}}
\renewcommand*{\mkbibnamefamily}[1]{%
\ifitemannotation{highlight}
  {\textbf{#1}}
  {#1}%
\ifitemannotation{first}
  {\textsuperscript{*}}
  {}%
\ifitemannotation{corresponding}
  {$^\dagger$}
  {}%
}%%
```
This is a bit complicated. It's because I want to highlight both Kasper D (my "given" name) and Hansen (my family name) in boldface, but the asterix and dagger only needs to go in the family name.

## More fluff

For my CV, this is how I construct the full entry
```{tex}
\usepackage[backend=biber,
           bibstyle=numeric,sorting=ydnt,sortcites=true,natbib=true,defernumbers=true,
           maxbibnames=99,giveninits=true,uniquename=false]{biblatex}
\renewbibmacro{in:}{}
```

## All of it

- A bib file [papers.bib](papers.bib)
- A tex file [cv.tex](cv.tex)
- The resulting PDF [cv.pdf](cv.pdf)

## Some comments

For completeness, I am describing what sections I have in my CV bibliography. Some of these sections are specified by my institution who wants peer reviewed material separated from non-peer reviewed material (the guidelines discuss opinion pieces, books etc). Following the golden principle of "if you take a shit, it goes on your CV" of US academic institutions, I have the following sections

- Journal Articles (peer reviewed)
- Journal Articles, Consortia member (peer reviewed)},keyword=peerconsortia]
- Preprints (not peer reviewed)
- Books, Theses, Editorials, Abandoned Preprints (not peer reviewed)
- Preprints, subsequently published (not peer reviewed)

So yes, I include published preprints (in their own section) with the `note = {Preprint. Published in Genome Biology 2019}`. 
